.if n .ds Q \&"
.if t .ds Q ``
.if n .ds U \&"
.if t .ds U ''
.TH "Mdebs" 7 
.tr \&
.nr bi 0
.nr ll 0
.nr el 0
.de DS
..
.de DE
..
.de Pp
.ie \\n(ll>0 \{\
.ie \\n(bi=1 \{\
.nr bi 0
.if \\n(t\\n(ll=0 \{.IP \\(bu\}
.if \\n(t\\n(ll=1 \{.IP \\n+(e\\n(el.\}
.\}
.el .sp 
.\}
.el \{\
.ie \\nh=1 \{\
.LP
.nr h 0
.\}
.el .PP 
.\}
..
.SH NAME

.Pp
mdebs - The Minimalistic Double-Entry Bookkeeping System
.Pp
.SH SYNOPSIS

.Pp
\fImdebs\fP options
.Pp
.SH COPYRIGHT

.Pp
The \fImdebs\fP program and this documentation is Copyright (C) 1997-1999 by
Nathan L. Cutler (the ``Author'').
.Pp
The Author has released \fImdebs\fP under the terms of the GNU General
Public License (GPL), Version 2.  A copy of the GPL is provided in the
top-level directory of the source code distribution in the file ``GPL''.
.Pp
If you modify \fImdebs\fP (read the Gnu General Public License before doing so),
please document your modifications in file separate from this documentation.
.Pp
This program is distributed in the hope that it will be useful,
but WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the
GNU General Public License for more details.
.Pp
You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License
along with this program;  if not, write to the Free Software
Foundation, Inc., 675 Mass Ave., Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
.Pp
.SH DESCRIPTION

.Pp
Mdebs is a program whose goal is to provide a solution for those who need to
do double-entry bookkeeping under Linux.
.Pp
.SH OPTIONS

.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.IP "--help OR -h "
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Print out a helpful message.
.IP " --version OR -v "
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Version information.
.IP "--prompt OR -p (arg)"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Sets prompt for mdebs to use
.IP "--verbose OR -V "
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Instructs mdebs to be more verbose.  This has the effect of displaying
"mdebs[lowbar]msg" priority messages and can generally be considered useful.
.IP "--db OR -D (arg)"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Instructs mdebs to use a database different than MDEBSDB
.IP "--validate (arg)"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
(Intended for use from shell scripts) Instructs mdebs to check a string to see
whether it constitutes a valid YYYYMMDD format date.
.IP "--initialize "
.nr bi 1
.Pp
(Intended for use from shell scripts) Instructs mdebs to set up a table
structure in the database pointed to by MDEBSDB, which is assumed to be empty.
.IP "--existdb (arg)"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
(Intended for use from shell scripts) Determine if a database exists
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.SH ENVIRONMENT

.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.IP "MDEBSDB"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Database to use when mdebs is invoked.
.IP "PAGER"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Pager to invoke when browsing query results.
.IP "HOME"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Full path of the user's home directory.
.IP "MDEBSDIR"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Full path of the mdebs installation (src) directory.
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.SH FILES

.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.IP "$MDEBSDIR/tools/*"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Shell scripts for use in administering mdebs
.IP "$MDEBSDIR/mdebs"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
The mdebs binary.
.IP "$MDEBSDIR/extras/*"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
Various goodies.
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.SH INTRODUCTION

.Pp
The goal of \fImdebs\fP is to provide a solution for those who need to do
double-entry bookkeeping under Linux.
.Pp
.SH Fundamental Principles

.Pp
\fIDates\fP
.Pp
.Pp
Dates must always be specified in the format \fIYYYYMMDD\fP.  That means
19980101 is January 1, 1998 and 19981231 is December 31, 1998.  Don't even
think of asking me to change this.
.Pp
.Pp
\fIAccounts\fP
.Pp
.Pp
Accounts are referred to as \fI[lsqb  ]major-number]-[lsqb  ]minor-number]\fP.
The major number is a three-digit numeric string (000-999) and the minor
number is a two-digit numeric string (00-99).  You can use an asterisk (``*'')
instead of the minor number in some cases to refer to all accounts with a
particular major number.  Examples of valid account numbers are 
.Pp
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
010-01
910-00
222-*
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.Pp
\fIAccount Shortcuts\fP
.Pp
.Pp
An "Account Shortcut" is a VARCHAR-type account identification field to
provide: (a) an alternate account naming scheme that's more flexible and
user-friendly than the major-minor number scheme, which is taken from Czech
Republic accounting legislation, and (b) a way to allow the user to group
items together without making exceptions to the major-minor numbers; this
would be useful, for example, to a manager who wants to monitor the
costliness of a project.  Just set up an Account Shortcut for the project
(call it "PROJ1") and include that in all entries related to the project.
Then run a DUMP JOURNAL SHO= PROJ1 command in \fImdebs\fP to see all the
journal entries related to that project.
.Pp
.Pp
\fIMonetary Amounts\fP
.Pp
.Pp
\fImdebs\fP assumes that all monetary amounts will be entered in a currency
that can be broken down into 100 smaller units (i.e. dollars/cents,
pounds/pence, marks/pfennigs, korunas/hellers, etc.).  It further assumes that
monetary amounts will be entered as integers in the smaller units.  If you're
keeping your books in dollars, this means you must enter all amounts in cents.
Thus, for \fImdebs\fP 100 means one dollar, 101 means $1.01, etc.  When
\fImdebs\fP prints out information, it puts in the decimal point, but it won't
accept decimal input.  This can be confusing at first.
.Pp
.Pp
\fIAccount Document Field\fP
.Pp
.Pp
[lsqb  ]Need to implement and document; should be fairly straightforward.]
.Pp
.Pp
\fIThe Chart of Accounts\fP
.Pp
.Pp
If you're interested in using \fImdebs\fP, you either already know all about
double-entry bookkeeping and already have a Chart of Accounts for your
company, in which case it's just a matter of converting your account number
scheme to use the \fImdebs\fP convention (see above), or you figure you're
going to use \fImdebs\fP to learn about double-entry bookkeeping, in which case
you can easily use the example Chart of Accounts provided in the
\fIchart.mdebs\fP batchfile in the \fIexamples\fP directory of the source
distribution.
.Pp
.Pp
[lsqb  ]Talk about using Account Shortcuts as an alternate or supplemental account
specification system.]
.Pp
.Pp
\fIMaking Journal Entries\fP
.Pp
.Pp
When you run \fImdebs\fP from the shell prompt with the \fIMDEBSDB\fP environment
variable pointing to an initialized \fImdebs\fP database, you are presented
with an \fImdebs\fP prompt.  At this prompt you can either enter an \fImdebs\fP
command (see section on Command Syntax, below), or begin a journal entry.
.Pp
.Pp
Journal entries consist of a first line, containing the date and description
of the journal entry in the format \fIYYYYMMDD "text"\fP (the quotes are
necessary if the description is to consist of more than one word), and at
least two lines describing movements on various accounts.  For example, if
your company issues an invoice for services rendered, you might make a journal
entry called "Invoice for services rendered" with a debit entry to Accounts
Receivable and a credit entry to Revenues.  Assuming that ``311 - 00'' is your
Accounts Receivable account and ``518 - 00'' is your Revenues account, your
journal entry might look something like this:
.Pp
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
mdebs-> 19980101 "Invoice for services rendered"
mdebs-> 311-00 12100 0
mdebs-> 518-00 0 12100
mdebs-> 
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.Pp
The ending newline signals \fImdebs\fP the end of the journal entry.  If the
journal entry passes the various checks (valid date, existing accounts, and
balanced debit/credit sides), \fImdebs\fP will insert the entry into the
database.
.Pp
.Pp
Journal entries can be more complicated.  For example, in some parts of the
world, companies have to charge VAT on their invoices.  Assuming a VAT rate of
5[percnt] and assuming the appropriate VAT account is ``343 - 01'', the above journal
entry might look like this:
.Pp
.DS
.sp 
.ft RR
.nf
mdebs-> 19980101 "Invoice for services rendered"
mdebs-> 311 - 00 12100 0
mdebs-> 343 - 01 0 576
mdebs-> 518 - 00 0 11524
mdebs-> 
.DE
.fi 
.ec
.ft P
.sp
.Pp
.Pp
Take extra special care to avoid making duplicate journal entries.  My method
for avoiding this is to keep accounting documents (invoices,
receipts, etc.) in a pile until I sit down to do bookkeeping.  As I make
journal entries for each accounting document, I put them in a binder.  This
helps keep the paper documentation in line with the books in the computer.
.Pp
.SH FAQ

.Pp
Actually, these questions are not asked ``frequently'', but calling this
section ``SAQ'' (Seldomly Asked Questions) seemed misleading.
.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 2
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.Pp
.IP "Where can I get the newest version?"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
The newest release of \fImdebs\fP
is available on http://web.iol.cz/livingston/mdebs/;
.Pp
.IP "Where's the documentation?"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
All the documentation is lumped together in a
single file, mdebs.sgml.  HTML and text versions of this file are included in
the distribution for convenience.  [lsqb  ]Need to figure out how to generate a man
page from the SGML file.]
.Pp
.IP "I downloaded Postgres, but \fImdebs\fP still won't compile!"
.nr bi 1
.Pp
You may
have downloaded \fIPostgres 4.0 (4.2)\fP, otherwise known as ``University
Postgres''. This is not what you want. University Postgres uses a query
language called \fIPOSTQUEL\fP and is no longer under active development.
.Pp
.Pp
\fImdebs\fP was written using \fIPostgreSQL\fP.  For more information on
\fIPostgreSQL\fP, see http://www.postgresql.org/
.Pp
.Pp
I recommend using a pre-packaged binary version of PostgreSQL instead of
building it from source, unless you are a masochist or are trying to prove
something.  As of the time of this writing, the Author was using PostgreSQL
6.5.3.
.Pp
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.SH \fImdebs\fP command Syntax

.Pp
\fImdebs\fP commands consist of three components: "verb" (e.g., DUMP, QUERY,
INSERT) indicating what type of operation to perform, an "object" (e.g.,
JOURNAL, CHART, ACCOUNT) indicating the type of data to be used in the
operation, and "the rest", which varies from case to case (could be a range of
dates for a DUMP command, or data to be inserted in the case of an INSERT).
.Pp
.Pp
Commands are to be distinguished from journal entries, which are complex and
use a completely different syntax.  Commands are always entered on a single
line, whereas journal entries take up several lines.  Journal entries are
discussed in the Fundamental Principles section, above.
.Pp
.Pp
\fIDUMP\fP
.Pp
.Pp
These commands generate ("dump") reports, or lists, of accounting data.
.Pp
.Pp
\fIDUMP CHART\fP
.Pp
.Pp
Lists the Chart of Accounts.
.Pp
.Pp
The command takes no arguments.  Its output is a table describing the Chart of
Accounts for the current database.
.Pp
.Pp
\fIDUMP ACCOUNT\fP
.Pp
.Pp
Generates a report giving movements on an account over a specified time
period.
.Pp
.Pp
The command takes an account number (or shortcut) argument and an optional
date range.  If no date range is specified, the entire fiscal year is assumed.
The command's output is a table containing all movements on the given account
during the period specified.  At the end, debit and credit totals are written.
This program can be useful in monthly, quarterly, and annual closings, VAT
closings, etc.  If the beginning and ending dates are the same, it prints out
all movements for a particular day.
.Pp
.Pp
A series of \fIDUMP ACCOUNT\fP commands could be used to print out a General
Ledger for any given period.
.Pp
.Pp
\fIDUMP JOURNAL\fP (see \fIQUERY JOURNAL)\fP
.Pp
.Pp
Dumps the journal (book of original entry) for specified date range.
.Pp
.Pp
\fIQUERY\fP
.Pp
.Pp
These commands generally output a single item, or are used to determine
whether something exists or not.
.Pp
.Pp
\fIQUERY JOURNAL [lsqb  ]date] [lsqb  ]ser[lowbar]num]\fP
.Pp
.Pp
Given a date and serial number of a particular journal entry, this command
outputs the journal entry as it might look in an actual journal.  This command
can be used in conjunction with \fIDUMP ACCOUNT\fP to analyze account
movements.
.Pp
.Pp
\fI[lsqb  ]Various shell scripts for making journal entries]\fP
.Pp
These shell scripts use the \fIdialog\fP program in an attempt to provide a
user-friendly way to enter journal entries into datafiles.  Just choose the
type of journal entry you want to make, provide the correct information, and
the script runs \fImdebs\fP for you.
.Pp
.SH Bash scripts for mdebs administration

.Pp
\fIdbinit\fP - Database (re)initialization script
.Pp
.Pp
Like \fImdebs\fP itself, \fIdbinit\fP gets the name of the database to be
initialized from the \fIMDEBSDB\fP environment variable.
The algorithm that \fIdbinit\fP uses can be summarized as follows:
.Pp
.Pp
1. If MDEBSDB enviro-variable is defined, ask user if s/he wants to
use this as the database to be (re)initialized; if not, ask user for
different database name
.Pp
2. Get fiscal year starting and ending dates from user
.Pp
3. Get path and filename of file containing commands for
initializing the Chart of Accounts
.Pp
4. If database already exists, ask for user confirmation before
destroying it
.Pp
5.(Re)create the database
.Pp
6. Set up the fiscal year of the database
.Pp
7. Set up the initial Chart of Accounts (both the fiscal year and
the Chart of Accounts can be changed at will later)
.Pp
.Pp
Using \fIdbinit\fP, you can set up as many mdebs databases as you like.  Each
database covers one fiscal year, or, more precisely, the time between the
beginning and ending dates specified as arguments to the \fIdbinit\fP script
when the database was initialized.
.Pp
.Pp
Be careful with \fIdbinit\fP.  I've made an effort to make the script be
careful and warn the user if an existing database is specified, but it only
asks once... So keep in mind that you could reinitialize (read lose) a
database with real data if you're not careful.
.Pp
.Pp
[lsqb  ]This would be a good place for a pointer to a section describing how to back
up mdebs databases, including instructions on how to restore them from
backups.]
.Pp
.Pp
Before you first run \fIdbinit\fP, you'll have to edit the script to make sure
the \fIMDEBSDIR\fP variable points to the directory containing the \fImdebs\fP
binary.  Read the comments at the beginning of the file; it should be fairly
self-explanatory.
.Pp
.SH Making Backups

.Pp
After you have used \fImdebs\fP for some time (say, a month or two), you'll
probably want to start making backups of your data.
.Pp
.Pp
\fIpgcopy-backup\fP
.Pp
.Pp
Description of the pgcopy-backup script.
.Pp
.Pp
\fIpostgres-backup\fP
.Pp
.Pp
Description of teh postgres-backup script.
.Pp
.SH Data Structures

.Pp
\fIfiscyear\fP - Fiscal Year Table
.Pp
The table \fIfiscyear\fP defines the fiscal year.
The field \fIstartd\fP is the starting date, and \fIendd\fP is the ending
date.
.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 0
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.nr bi 1
.Pp
startd (DATE)
.nr bi 1
.Pp
endd (DATE)
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.Pp
\fIosnova\fP - Chart of Accounts Table
.Pp
The table \fIosnova\fP defines the Chart of Accounts.  \fIacct\fP is the
account's code (up to three characters), \fIanal\fP is a two-character
sub-account (``analytical'') code, and \fIdesig\fP is a description of the
account.
.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 0
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.nr bi 1
.Pp
acct (CHAR(3))
.nr bi 1
.Pp
anal (CHAR(2))
.nr bi 1
.Pp
desig (VARCHAR(60))
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.Pp
\fIdescs\fP - Journal Entry Descriptions Table
.Pp
The table \fIdescs\fP holds the journal entries, and contains the fields
\fIent[lowbar]date\fP (Entry Date) and \fIpor[lowbar]cislo\fP (Serial Number), which
together constitute a link to the \fIdenik\fP (Journal) table.  In addition,
\fIdescs\fP contains a field \fIdesig\fP, which describes the journal entry.
.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 0
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.nr bi 1
.Pp
ent[lowbar]date (DATE)
.nr bi 1
.Pp
por[lowbar]cislo (INT)
.nr bi 1
.Pp
desig (VARCHAR(80))
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.Pp
\fIporad\fP - Journal Entry Serial Number Table
.Pp
The table \fIporad\fP (Serial) is a funny little table made necessary by the
relationship between the tables \fIdescs\fP and \fIdenik\fP (Journal).  When
journal entries are being added to the database the program has to be able to
determine the last serial number used for a particular day.  It does so by
looking up the value of \fImax[lowbar]cislo\fP (Maximum Number) for the particular day
in this table.
.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 0
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.nr bi 1
.Pp
ent[lowbar]date (DATE)
.nr bi 1
.Pp
max[lowbar]cislo (INT)
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.Pp
\fIdenik\fP - Journal Entry Accounts and Amounts Table
.Pp
Last, but certainly not least, is the table \fIdenik\fP (Journal), which contains
fields describing a journal entry.  The \fIent[lowbar]date\fP and \fIpor[lowbar]cislo\fP
(Serial Number) fields point to the \fIdescs\fP table.  The \fI[lsqb  ]m]d[lowbar]acct\fP
(Debit/Credit Major Number) and
\fI[lsqb  ]m]d[lowbar]anal\fP (Debit/Credit Minor Number) fields point to the \fIosnova\fP (Chart) table (in other words, the
latter contain account numbers for debit and credit amounts).  The
\fI[lsqb  ]m]d[lowbar]amt\fP (Debit/Credit Amount) fields contain debit and credit amounts.  Amounts are
represented as integers in the database.  When asked to display movements on
accounts, \fImdebs\fP will display the amounts with a decimal point, but this
is just a cosmetic feature for user comfort.
Each record is like one line of a journal entry; either the
debit or the credit side will be zero.  When all entries matching a certain
date and serial number are added together, the debit and credit sides must
be equal.
.Pp
.nr ll +1
.nr t\n(ll 0
.if \n(ll>1 .RS
.nr bi 1
.Pp
ent[lowbar]date (DATE)
.nr bi 1
.Pp
por[lowbar]cislo (INT)
.nr bi 1
.Pp
md[lowbar]acct  (CHAR(3))
.nr bi 1
.Pp
md[lowbar]anal (CHAR(2))
.nr bi 1
.Pp
md[lowbar]amt (INT)
.nr bi 1
.Pp
d[lowbar]acct (CHAR(3))
.nr bi 1
.Pp
d[lowbar]anal (CHAR(2))
.nr bi 1
.Pp
d[lowbar]amt (INT)
.if \n(ll>1 .RE
.nr ll -1
.Pp
.SH BUGS

.Pp
Many.  If you find one, please let me know.
.Pp
.SH SEE ALSO

.Pp
postgres(1), PostgreSQL documentation (http://www.postgresql.org)
.Pp
Mdebs Home Page: http://web.iol.cz/livingston/mdebs/
.Pp
.SH AUTHOR

.Pp
Nathan L. Cutler livingston@iol.cz
.Pp
